Most modern AI products are built from
the same set of core ideas. In the next
seven minutes, I'll walk through nine
concepts you will see repeatedly across
real world AI systems. One,
tokenization. Neural networks like LMS
cannot work with raw text directly. A
tokenizer breaks text into smaller units
called tokens and maps each token to an
integer ID. So, the model can take the
sequence as input instead of raw text.
The most common algorithm is bite pair
encoding or BPE. BPE starts from small
units often bytes or characters and
repeatedly merges the most frequent
adjacent pairs to form new tokens. Over
time, common fragments like ing or ti
become single tokens. So words like
walking might be split as walk plus ing.
Two, text decoding. An LLM simply
outputs a probability distribution over
the vocabulary for the next token. A
decoding algorithm chooses one token
from that distribution, appends it to
the sequence, and repeats the process to
produce a full response. The simplest
text decoding approach is greedy
decoding, which always picks the most
likely next token. It can work well for
deterministic tasks, but not for tasks
requiring creativity. Sampling based
methods add controlled randomness to
improve diversity. For example, top P
sampling draws the next token from the
smallest set of tokens whose
probabilities sum to P, then samples
from that set. Three, prompt
engineering. Vake prompts usually lead
to vague answers. Prompt engineering is
the practice of shaping instructions and
context to steer a model's behavior
without changing its weights. A strong
prompt clearly states the task key
constraints and expected output format.
One common technique is fshot prompting
where you include a handful of examples
so the model imitates the desired style
and structure. Another is chain of
thought prompting which you ask for
step-by-step reasoning. Coot prompting
can improve performance on problems that
require multi-step logic like math and
coding. Prompt engineering is widely
used because it is fast to iterate on
and inexpensive compared to training or
fine-tuning a model. Four, multi-step AI
agents. An LLM on its own only generates
text. It cannot take actions like
browsing the web, checking the weather,
or running code. Multi-step agents wrap
an LLM in a loop with access to tools
and memory. So it can plan what to do
next, call external tools, and use the
results to decide the next step. The
agent repeats this cycle until it
reaches the goal, runs out of a budget,
or determines it cannot make further
progress.
Five, retrieval augmented generation. A
plain LLM answers using only what is
stored in its weights. So it can be
wrong or outdated on recent events or
changing company policies. Rag pairs an
LLM with a retrieval system connected to
a knowledge store. When you ask a
question, the retriever first pulls
relevant passages from sources like
PDFs, docs, or a database. Then the LLM
uses those passages to write the answer.
This grounds the response in external
evidence instead of relying only on the
model's memory.
Six, reinforcement learning from human
feedback. The initial launch of Chad GPT
succeeded in large because of the RLHF
stage. RLHF is a reinforcement learning
approach where the model practices by
generating multiple candidate responses.
A separate reward model scores them and
the training algorithm updates the
model's weights. So higher scoring
responses become more likely over time.
This pushes the model toward outputs
that people consistently rate as more
helpful, clear, and safe, not just
outputs that are statistically likely.
RLHFs align an LLM with human
preferences, mainly because of how the
reward model is trained. The reward
model learns directly from human
feedback, usually from pairs of model
responses to the same prompt where
annotators pick the one they prefer. By
learning these preference patterns, the
reward model becomes a proxy for what
humans tend to want and reinforcement
learning uses that signal to steer the
LLM toward responses that score higher
on that proxy.
Seven, variational autoenccoder. A VAE
is a generative modeling approach that
learns a probability distribution of
data. A VAE consists of two neural
networks, an encoder and a decoder. The
encoder maps the input into a
lowdimensional latent representation
while the decoder maps the latent vector
back to the original input space.
Training optimizes a reconstruction
objective so the decoded output stays
close to the original input. After
training, new data can be generated by
sampling a point from the latent space
and decoding it. In modern text to image
and texttovideo systems like OpenAI's
Sora, a VA is often used as a latent
compressor, allowing the downstream
model to operate more efficiently in a
smaller space.
Eight, diffusion models. Diffusion
models generate data by learning to
reverse a gradual noising process.
During training, you take real samples
like images, add noise over many time
steps, and train a model to predict the
noise given the noisy input. the time
step and optional conditioning such as
text. At inference time, you start from
pure noise and repeatedly apply the
learn the noising step to move toward a
clean sample.
Nine, low rank adaptation. Large models
like LLMs and textto image systems are
general purpose. They handle broad
everyday tasks well, but often struggle
in specialized domains. Laura is an
efficient fine-tuning method that adapts
a pre-trained model without updating all
of its parameters. It keeps the original
linear layer weights frozen and adds two
small low rank trainable matrices. So
the model can learn a domain specific
adjustments with far fewer new
parameters. With this foundation, you
should find reading future AI designs
and articles much easier.